---
layout: post
title: Emergency Services in a Pandemic
published: true
---

The world is in a singular moment. For the first time in the history of modern medicine, we have a highly contagious and remarkably dangerous disease outpacing medical research and public health measures designed to mitigate and contain it. In a time when quick fixes to virtually any problem rule the public consciousness, we are seeing failure after failure, forcing painful fallbacks to strict personal isolation on societal scales. It often seems like all the rules we have learned throughout our lives have been broken.

The public safety and first responder workforce is faced with a particularly surreal existence. Although so many signs of normalcy have disappeared, such as team sports of any kind and crowd-generating events besides nationwide protests, we continue to respond to extreme weather, public safety threats, infrastructure failures, and wildfires. Unfortunately, it is now prudent to consider how long you were within touching distance of other humans, and for how long, before greeting your loved ones after your shift ends. How can we maintain readiness, recruit new talent, manage our facilities, and effectively deal with drastically shifting public opinions of our government's priorities in such an unfamiliar environment?

Of course, there is no quick fix. The playbook for this confluence of events was never written. We're all making it up as we go, but that reality might help set a course when confronting a particularly difficult challenge. The fact is, we're not in this alone. Every agency, every department, every squad is having to improvise. Some things will work and some won't, but by staying in contact and sharing experiences, we'll all be able to make decisions more quickly and weed out the less effective approaches. Let's learn together.

It would also be wise to start looking for alternatives to traditional tools and methods as well. Can supervisors and employees find ways to connect without regular face-to-face meetings? Can training syllabi be reimagined to emphasize offsite availability and virtual collaboration? Perhaps now is a good time to focus on capturing lessons learned from veterans of your organization in audio, video or written form and using the material as the basis for extending the scope and effectiveness of advanced training. Becker Support has the experience and tools to help in every phase of this, from forensic incident reconstruction, to training curriculum design, to facilitation and immersive virtual environment creation. [Contact us](https://www.beckersupport.net/contact) for more information.
