---
published: true
---
The Jesusita Trail in Santa Barbara, California is a local treasure. Starting just 1.5 miles from downtown, the trail winds up through oak-lined canyons to breathtaking views of the city and ocean. When the prevailing sea breeze pushes the cool, salty coastal fog up the slope, the 1,574-foot climb can be invigorating. Not surprisingly, it is one of the most heavily-used trails in the area.

The trail passes through a patchwork of public and private land, while the higher elevations are solidly in the Los Padres National Forest. Several volunteer groups have advocated for and maintained the trail despite sometimes disagreeing on policy and access matters. Mountain biking is a particularly contentious subject, just like it has become for many popular outdoor recreational areas. In some locales, tensions have been known to run so high as to induce accusations of trail sabotage and political malfeasance. Santa Barbara’s advocacy groups have sparred during public comment periods for land use plans, but civility and tolerance have kept disputes out of the headlines.

Spring is the growing season in Southern California. Low and mid elevations explode with annual grasses as winter rains subside and longer days with more intense sunlight warm the soil. Exposed trails on south-facing slopes disappear under waist-deep thickets of oats and forbs. Between April 7 and May 5, 2009, no fewer than five projects (conducted by three different groups) on the Jesusita Trail targeted problem areas where new growth had partially or totally restricted passage. Trail maintenance can be an a unifying - or at least truce-worthy - issue for hikers, mountain bikers, and equestrian advocates, and for years in Santa Barbara, members of the many advocacy groups have coordinated with the various private landowners and public agencies to establish schedules, training programs, and tool sharing for trail maintenance. Participants take pride in their involvement and enjoy the fruits of their labor.

On May 5, 2009, the feel-good story of collaborative trail maintenance took an unfortunate and ironic turn. A pair of mountain biking volunteers used brush cutters with metal blades to tackle a section of trail where overgrowth on switchbacks had impaired visibility, creating the potential for dangerous recreational encounters. After a seasonally typical morning of low clouds and fog that burned off to a bright, clear, warm day, the two cut and piled brush and grasses along the trailside for a little more than an hour before heading out so one of them could make an afternoon appointment. They started to hear news of a fire on the trail shortly afterwards.

The first person to discover the fire called 911 when it was only about four feet in diameter and he was unable to extinguish it himself. The hiker feared he would be blamed for starting it, and did not volunteer information to the firefighters who had just arrived when he made it back to the trailhead. It’s unlikely that the outcome would have changed; while the fire was undetectable at its start, and grew to only a four-foot ring in one to two hours, the hot afternoon sun and diurnal “sundowner” winds took over from there. 155 buildings (including 80 homes) were ultimately destroyed and another 22 were damaged. More importantly, two firefighters were seriously burned and countless people suffered smoke inhalation-related medical issues.

The brush cutters most likely struck a hidden rock and threw an invisible spark into the dead underbrush. The mountain bikers knew better than to use metal cutting tools during periods of high fire danger, but they probably believed that the danger was low enough that nothing bad would actually happen. They took a calculated risk, perhaps because they knew the place they would be working was too overgrown for them to make much headway in the limited time they had available without the benefit of metal blades. The cool, humid morning conditions probably added to their confidence that the risk was minimal. Past history would have reinforced such a perception - despite such frequent trail maintenance over many years, the area had not had a significant wildfire since 1965.

The Jesusita Fire is an extreme outlier. According to the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), [local fire departments respond to an average of 306,000 brush, grass and forest fires per year](http://www.nfpa.org/research/reports-and-statistics/outdoor-fires/brush-grass-and-forest-fires). Roughly 15,300 of those are started by garden tools or other agricultural equipment, while only about one in twenty burn more than ten acres before being controlled. Outliers are a challenge to our normal risk-management thought process. In this case, one of the suspects was a fifth-generation Santa Barbaran As he told investigators, he “knew the drill” with regard to dry vegetation and warm weather. Another way to put it was that the risk was normalized by his years of experience of fires not starting under similar conditions.

A multi-layered approach is generally best at preventing high-consequence accidents. Professor of Psychology James T. Reason popularized the “[Swiss cheese model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swiss_cheese_model)” as a way to understand how these approaches work, as well as how they can be defeated. In the case of the Jesusita Fire, one layer of fire prevention was a California Fire Code requiring a “hot work permit” for use of equipment such as the brush cutters that presumably caused the spark that started the blaze. A major problem with this layer was that its very existence [turned out to be a surprise to other trail maintenance volunteers and even officials responsible for issuing the permits](https://www.independent.com/2009/12/10/trail-gnomes-charged-jesusita-fire/). In other words, if the hole in your defense layer is as big as the layer itself, it offers no real protection.

Fire prevention is always a preferred alternative to fire suppression. The problem with advocating for stronger fire prevention measures is that the desired outcome of such measures is the absence of fires, which logically challenges the need for such measures in the first place. Fire professionals understand this conundrum. One thing that fire prevention programs must strive to avoid is ineffectiveness in any of their measures. Meaningless regulations or equipment modifications that cripple the item’s utility ultimately do more harm than good. Agencies often find that they can make their fire prevention dollars work harder for them just by having impartial experts conduct a periodic review of their existing measures.

Becker Support offers deep and varied expertise in structural and wildland fire prevention. Our professional network includes the foremost fire dynamics researchers in the field, renowned forensic scientists and investigators, and human behavior/human factors luminaries. We specialize in data-driven approaches to implementing and monitoring fire prevention measures, which can provide clients with hard evidence that their investments are paying off. Our methods follow internationally accepted safety and quality management standards. [Contact Becker Support](https://www.beckersupport.net/contact) to discuss your fire prevention program and explore options for a thorough review.

_Factual information in this post that is not directly linked to its source is in the Santa Barbara County Fire Department’s Investigation Report of the Jesusita Fire. Copies of the report can be requested by emailing inspection.services@sbcfire.com and requesting a copy of the 2009 Jesusita Fire investigation report. The incident number is 09-SBC-3850/LPF 001479._

Further reading:
[https://lompocrecord.com/news/local/crime-and-courts/two-men-charged-in-connection-with-jesusita-fire/article_e34ccc5c-e626-11de-936a-001cc4c03286.html](https://lompocrecord.com/news/local/crime-and-courts/two-men-charged-in-connection-with-jesusita-fire/article_e34ccc5c-e626-11de-936a-001cc4c03286.html)

https://www.independent.com/2013/08/01/jesusita-fire-settlement-reached/
