---
layout: post
title: AFUE Report Released
published: true
---

The United States Forest Service has released a final report on the Aerial Firefighting Use and Effectiveness (AFUE) study (https://www.fs.usda.gov/sites/default/files/2020-08/08192020_afue_final_report_0.pdf). This report attempts to summarize eight years of field data collection and analysis in 46 pages. While it leaves out the vast majority of information that the study produced, there are important beachheads that it establishes. Of particular importance is the principle of documenting the planned effects of aviation use along with detailed environmental conditions and contributing factors to the actual outcomes.

Prior to AFUE, no studies had taken this approach to exploring the effects and effectiveness of aircraft specifically. AFUE is also the first field study to collect data throughout the nation, and to explicitly document the geospatial and temporal aspects of every data element. This allows an unprecedented amount of accuracy and detail in reconstructing the cause-and-effect relationship of events at an individual incident level. AFUE team members developed a hierarchy of coordination to group related data elements (see pages 10-11). This hierarchy connects groups of drops and other actions like dozer line to specific management decisions. The point in doing this grouping with the data is to allow analysis that evaluates _how often_ specific management decisions are successful, and when they aren't successful, _what specifically led to failure._ The amount of organizational learning that becomes possible with this approach is tremendous. Future posts will explore this in greater depth.
